Add `Application Lifetime` session content (#25)
security-summer-school/essentials: application-lifetime/index.md

weight: 10
---

> # Table of Contents

Reviewer: Remove this. We decided we won't be using it anymore.

Use [gh-md-toc](https://github.com/ekalinin/github-markdown-toc).

# Introduction

This session is the first that will look into binary applications, more commonly knows as executables.
We will discuss many things, like:

- getting from code to application - compiling, linking and loading
- what is a process
- the memory address space of a process
- how to start a process

# Reminders and Prerequisites

- Information required for this section
- Commands / snippets that should be known, useful to copy-paste throughout the practical session

> # Content Sections:

Reviewer: No need for this section. Simply start with `# From Code to Application`. This will increase the section level in the entire session (`##` -> `#` etc.).

## From Code to Application

Every application is written in some form of code.

> That code can be compiled or interpreted, in order to do what the user wants it to do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That code can be compiled or interpreted, in order to do what the developer wants it to do.
```

When the code is interpreted, another application reads the contents of the source-code, and acts based on those contents.

> Interpreted code isn't the focus of the session, but can be interesting for those that want to delve into Web Security - the browser can be seen as an interpreter of JavaScript code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Interpreted code isn't the focus of the session, but can be interesting for those that want to delve into web security - the browser can be seen as an interpreter of JavaScript code.
```

Bash and Python are other examples of interpreted languages.

> This session we will focus mainly on compiled code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this session we will focus mainly on compiled code.
```

> For compiled code to become a working application, 3 steps are needed: **compling**, **linking** and **loading**. 

Reviewer 2: Mention. "Some languages, such as C/C++, may provide an initial optional step of **preprocessing**."

![From Code to Process](assets/from_code_to_elf.svg)

The diagram from above represents the process during which some source code becomes a running application.
The steps are detailed below.

### Compiling

> Compiling is the step in which a piece of code becomes binary data, readable by the CPU.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compiling is the step in which a piece of code becomes binary data, readable by the CPU, also called **machine code**.
```

This step is performed by the compiler.
The best-known compiler for C is **GNU C Compiler (GCC)**.
While tehnically it is not correct to say that we get to a binary file by compiling (assembly would like to say hello), we will leave it like this for now.
Compiling is not enough to have a working application, because we lack the libraries, which do most of the important actions of an application, like I/O, memory allocation and so on.

> Those libraries can be standard libraries (libc), OS-specific libraries - the ones for system calls, or libraries written by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those libraries can be standard libraries (libc), OS-specific libraries - the ones for system calls, or libraries written by developers and 3rd parties.
```

The libraries are added to the binary file in the **linking** step.
The compilation process creates **object files**, which are used in linking.

![Compiling step](assets/compiling.svg)

TODO: Demo - Compilation

### Linking

> Linking is the step in which libraries are added to our application.

Reviewer 2: Not only this. Linking is the step in which multiple object files (belonging to the application) together with libraries are tied together in a final executable.

This step is done by the linker.

> The result of the linking step is an ELF file (Execulable and Linkable File).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result of the linking step is an executable file.
The format of the executable file depends on the operating system that runs it.
Linux uses the ELF (*Execulable and Linkable Format*).
Windows uses the PE (*Portable Executable*) format.
macOS uses the Mach-O (*Mach Object*) format.
```

This file can then be executed.

TODO: Demo - See the libraries used by an executable

The linking step can use 2 types of libraries: static and dynamic.
The linking process itself can be of 2 types, static and dynamic.
Now that confusion has been created, lets explain each of those.

#### Static Library

A static library is a library whose entire content is copied, as-is, in the executable.
A static library is created using the `ar` command, and has the **.a** extension.

> TODO: Tutorial - create a static library

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't focus on creating libraries. I would only focus on analyzing them and using them.

#### Static Linking

Static linking is the process in which **static libraries** are added to the final executable.
This is done in a straightforward manner: copy everything from the libraries to the executable.
This leads to big executables, that generally run faster and can run on other systems even if the libraries are not installed.

> However, the staticly-linked executables aren't more portable - maybe the library uses something not present on the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the statically-linked executables aren't more portable - maybe the library uses something not present on the system.
```

They are more portable. If a static executable doesn't work, for sure a dynamic one won't work. But not the other way around.

Author: A dynamic one might work where a static one doesn't, when porting. Consider a libc that uses AVX or something. If the system where the binary is ported doesn't have AVX, the static one will crash, the dynamic one will work

![Static Linking Overview](assets/static_linking.svg)

TODO: Demo - Static Linking - libc + own library

#### Dynamic Libraries

Dynamic libraries aren't copied in the exectable, like their static counterparts.
Instead, they are loaded into memory when needed, and each executable that uses them has a way to access the symbols from those libraries.
The exact process is detailed in the first session of the binary track, TODO.
For now, the only thing you must remember is that all executables use the same dynamic library.

> One defining trait of the dynamic libraries is that they must be **PIE - Position Independent Executables**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One defining trait of the dynamic libraries is that they must be compiled as PIC (*Position Independent Code*) objects.
```

> TODO: Tutorial - Create a dynamic library

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't focus on this.

##### PIE - Position Independent Executable

Maybe you've come across the **PIE** notion before.
The notion of PIE is almost equivalent to the notion of PIC - position independent code - so the 2 are used interchangeably.
A PIE executable is one that can be loaded anywhere in the memory, and still work the same.
While it isn't very clear why would you want to load an execuable at any address, for now, it is very important for dynamic libraries.
Because the dynamic library doesn't know where it will be loaded when the executable is launched, it is necessary for it to be able to be loaded anywhere in the memory of the program. 

#### Dynamic Linking

Dynamic linking is the process during which a dynamic library is "connected" to the executable.
It is the default type of linking.
The resulting executable is smaller in size, but not as easy to port on another system.
In order for it to run on another system, the used dynamic libraries must be installed first.
It is also open to some kinds of attacks.

> One of them is **Return to libc**, which is discussed at the binary track of SSS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of them is the **return-to-libc** attack, which is discussed at the binary track of SSS.
```

![Dynamic Linking Overview](assets/dynamic_linking.svg)

TODO: Tutorial - Dynamic linking - libc + own library

### Loading

Loading is the process in which the program is launched.

> During this process, the program code is placed in the OS memory, the dynamic libraries are found, and everything is executed by the OS.

Reviewer 2: This seems to give too much credit and ownership to the OS. It seems the OS is everywhere. I would rephrase it to tone down the role of the OS as a bootstrapper of the process then handling the ropes to the application.

So, in a way, the program doesn't run by itself, but the OS executes the instructions of the program, similar to the interpreted languages.
A loaded executable is represented in the OS as a **process**.

![Loading Overview](assets/loading.svg)

TODO: Tutorial: Our own libc

## Processes

A process can be seen as an abstraction of the system's resources, built for each launched application.
It is important to know that one executable can be launched multiple times, at the same time, resulting in different processes.
Each process has at least one execution **thread**, that runs the code of the application, one **virtual address space**, and one **file descriptor table**.
They represent abstractions of the main resources of the system: **CPU**, **memory**, **I/O**.

TODO: Insert process layout

TODO: Demo - list the processes in the system.

> ### Threads

Reviewer 2: ditch

- **HEAP** - **RW-** - the section where dynamic memory allocations are stored - `malloc` and friends
- **DATA** - **RW-** - the global initialized variables
- **RODATA** - **R--** - the read-only global initialized variables
- **BSS** - **RW-** - the unitialized global variables; this section is somewhat special - it doesn't occupy space in the executable and is filled at runtime; the other sections occupy space in the executable.
- some spicy sections: **GOT**, **PLT**; you can read about them in the [Further Reading](#further-reading) section.

TODO: Insert virtual memory diagram

TODO: Demo - See the memory layout of a process

Now, some security stuff: all sections must follow the NX princpile - if a section is writable, it can't be executable.
Why?
You don't want your application to be able to execute code that wasn't written by you, but was injected by someone else.

This can and is exploited, by an attack method called **shellcode**.
Shellcodes represent a big part of the [SSS Binary track](https://security-summer-school.github.io/binary/shellcodes/).

> The virtual address space isn't fixed during the execution of a program; it can be changed by the program itself, using `mmap` to create new entires, and `mprotect` to change the permissions.

Reviewer 2: everything from mmap to private mmap, memory mapped files goes away, it's too much

Using `mprotect`, an application can change, for example, a page belonging to the `rodata` section to be writeable.

TODO: Tutorial - Take **RO** out of **RODATA**

### File Descriptors

I/O access is usually done through files.
Each process keeps track of the files it has opened using file descriptors.
Opening, closing, modifiying a file in any way can be done only by the OS.
In order for the application to interact with files, it needs to use system calls: `open`, `close`, `read`, `write` and many others.

#### open, openat, close

Before any operation can be performed on a file, it must be opened, using `open`.
An open file can be closed, and the file descriptor freed for other uses, using `close`.

TODO: Insert open diagram

#### read, write

`read` and `write` are the main ways in which a file can be modified.
Each call of `write` modifies the file on the storage environment.
However, there are ways to modify a file, but have those modifications visible only to the current process.

TODO: Insert write diagram

TODO: Challenge - Blackbox - Read my Files 

#### Advanced: Private mmap

#### Advanced: Memory Mapped Files

TODO: Insert memory mapped files diagram

> ## Creating a Process

Reviewer: See if the resources given by @razvand here [1] are useful to you. They might help you explain this section in a smoother way.

[1] https://github.com/systems-cs-pub-ro/operating-systems-oer/pull/5#discussion_r915513591

This is because the bash process launches the exectable, using the `fork` and `exec` system calls.
Basically, what happens is that the bash process duplicates itself, then loads the code of our executable into the duplicate process.

### Fork

The duplication is done by the `fork` call.
The memory of the child process is the same as that of the parent, until it's modified, as are the open file descriptors.
After the `fork` call, the parent must wait for the child process to finish.
Otherwise, it remains active, until it is cleaned-up by the OS.

The fact that the parent shares file descriptors with the child allows for some communication between the 2 processes, apart by using the shared memory.
This is done through **annonymous pipes**, created by the `pipe` system call.
In short, before the parent creates the child, it creates a pipe - a memory zone with 2 file descriptors, one that sends data, one that receives data.
When the child is created, it inherits the 2 file descriptors.
Now, depending on the desired direction of the pipe, the parent will close the in-end, and the child the out-end, or the other way around.

> For example, if the parent wants to receive data from the child, it will close the in-end, and the child will close the out-end.

Reviewer: I think you went overboard with this. Why is this needed? Sticking to `fork` should be enough.

Reviewer 2: What he said. Just show a short description of fork.

Reviewer 2: Actually drop it all. It's too much for this session. It just creates a new process and that's it.

TODO: Insert fork diagram

TODO: Tutorial - Fork me

TODO: Challenge - Blackbox - Let it speak

> ### Exec

Reviewer 2: Drop this, it's too much.

Author: `exec` I think should stay. At binary they are expected to know what exec does

`exec` and its variants are used to change the executable run by the process, or the **image**, as it is called in this context.
`exec` can be used toghether with fork, as done by the terminal, or without it.
One use that you may encounter in the security world is using `exec` to make a process spawn a terminal, after you have gained control of the process.

TODO: Insert exec diagram

TODO: Tutorial - Give me that shell

TODO: Challenge - Blackbox - If you want something done well, do it yourself

> ### Advanced: Shared Memory

Reviewer 2: Drop this, too much.

weight: 10
---

# Introduction

This session is the first that will look into binary applications, more commonly knows as executables.
We will discuss many things, like:

- getting from code to application - compiling, linking and loading
- what is a process
- the memory address space of a process
- how to start a process

# From Code to Application

Every application is written in some form of code.
That code can be compiled or interpreted, in order to do what the developer wants it to do.
When the code is interpreted, another application reads the contents of the source-code, and acts based on those contents.

> Interpreted code isn't the focus of the session, but can be interesting for those that want to delve into web security - the browser can be seen as an interpreter of JavaScript code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interpreted code isn't the focus of the session, but can be interesting for those that want to delve into web security - the browser can be seen as an interpreter for JavaScript code.
```

Bash and Python are other examples of interpreted languages.

> In this session we will focus mainly on compiled code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this session, we will focus mainly on compiled code.
```

For compiled code to become a working application, 3 steps are needed: **compling**, **linking** and **loading**.

> Some languages, like C and C++, require an additional step before compiling, **preprocessing**.

Reviewer: Preprocessing is overrated. I wouldn't even consider it a separate step. It's not relevant to this section, so you can simply remove this line.

Author: I believe it's better to leave it there, just so the students hear the term

![From Code to Process](assets/from_code_to_elf.svg)

> The diagram from above represents the process during which some source code becomes a running application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagram above represents the process through which some source code becomes a running application.
```

The steps are detailed below.

## Compiling

Compiling is the step in which a piece of code becomes binary data, readable by the CPU, also called **machine code**.
This step is performed by the compiler.
The best-known compiler for C is **GNU C Compiler (GCC)**.
While tehnically it is not correct to say that we get to a binary file by compiling (assembly would like to say hello), we will leave it like this for now.
Compiling is not enough to have a working application, because we lack the libraries, which do most of the important actions of an application, like I/O, memory allocation and so on.
Those libraries can be standard libraries (libc), OS-specific libraries - the ones for system calls, or libraries written by developers and 3rd parties.
The libraries are added to the binary file in the **linking** step.

> The compilation process creates **object files**, which are used in linking.

Reviewer: This is too much information all of a sudden. Break it up and take it slowly:
1. Mention the compiler and then use it to create an object file.
2. Try to run it and explain why this fails.
- This is where this subsection ends
3. Link the object file and then run it successfully.

Wrap all of this in a tutorial (containing a flag) where students are just supposed to compile and run an application.

![Compiling step](assets/compiling.svg)

To compile a `.c` source code, the `-c` flag is used.

```
$ gcc -c code.c
```

The result is a binary object file, that can then be linked.

## Linking

Linking is the step in which libraries are added to our application.
This step is done by the linker.
The result of the linking step is an executable file.
The format of the executable file depends on the operating system that runs it.
Linux uses the ELF (*Execulable and Linkable Format*).
Windows uses the PE (*Portable Executable*) format.

> macOS uses the Mach-O (*Mach Object*) format.

Reviewer: A lot of information, soon to be forgotten. It's not needed, so ditch it. It just bloats an already condensed text.

Author: Again, I think it's better that the students hear of the terms, at least

weight: 10
---

# Session 08: Application Lifetime

> ## Table of Contents

Reviewer: You still haven't deleted it.

> ## Table of Contents

Author: it is deleted. Look at the whole file

It is important to know that one executable can be launched multiple times, at the same time, resulting in different processes.
Each process has access to the main resources of a system: **CPU**, **memory**, and **I/O devices**, through abstractions.
Those abstractions are there to isolate different processes in a system.

![Process Overview](assets/process_layout.svg)

To see what processes are running, the `ps` command can be used.

A simple `$ ps` command whill show only the child processes of the current terminal, and the terminal itself.

```shell
$ ps
    PID TTY          TIME CMD
   9116 pts/0    00:00:00 bash
  51170 pts/0    00:00:00 ps
```

By default, the PID, and the command used to launch the process are listed.
The TTY and TIME parameters will be ignored, as they aren't relevant.

To display all processes on a system, `$ ps -e` can be used.

### Process Address Space

From a process point-of-view, the entire memory of a system is available, and almost any portion of it can be used.
Behind the scenes, the OS maps the process memory to physical memory, and ensures that two unrelated processes can't see eachother's virtual memory.

> The process memory is split into sections, which can contain one or more pages.

Reviewer: This is the first time you introduce the notion of pages. You need to elaborate on it before mentioning `mprotect()` below.

- **DATA** - **RW-** - the global initialized variables
- **RODATA** - **R--** - the read-only global initialized variables
- **BSS** - **RW-** - the uninitialized global variables;
this section is somewhat special - it doesn't occupy space in the executable and is filled at runtime;
the other sections occupy space in the executable.
- some spicy sections: **GOT**, **PLT**;
you can read about them in the [Further Reading](#further-reading) section.

![Process Address Space Layout](assets/memory_layout.svg)

To explore the sections of an executable, `objdump` can be used.
To see the contents of the **DATA** section, run `$ objdump -s -j .data <executable>`

Now, some security stuff: all sections must follow the NX princpile - if a section is writable, it can't be executable.
Why?
You don't want your application to be able to execute code that wasn't written by you, but was injected by someone else.

This can be exploited, if the principle isn't respected, by an attack method called **shellcode**.
Shellcodes represent a big part of the [SSS Binary track](https://security-summer-school.github.io/binary/shellcodes/).

> The process address space isn't fixed during the execution of a program; it can be changed by the program itself, using `mmap` to create new entries, and `mprotect` to change the permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process address space isn't fixed during the execution of a program; it can be changed by the program itself, using `mmap()` to create new entries, and `mprotect()` to change the permissions.
```
Similarly, all function names must be followed by `()` to be distinct from other symbols.

#### mprotect

`mprotect` is used to change the permissions of a memory page.
Using `mprotect`, an application can change, for example, a page belonging to the `rodata` section to be writeable.

### File Descriptors

I/O access is usually done through files.
Each process keeps track of the files it has opened using file descriptors.
Opening, closing, modifiying a file in any way can be done only by the OS.
In order for the application to interact with files, it needs to use system calls: `open`, `close`, `read`, `write` and many others.

#### open, openat, close

Before any operation can be performed on a file, it must be opened, using `open`.
An open file can be closed, and the file descriptor freed for other uses, using `close`.

#### read, write

`read` and `write` are the main ways in which a file can be modified.
Each call of `write` modifies the file on the storage environment.
However, there are ways to modify a file, but have those modifications visible only to the current process.

## Creating a Process

Now let's discuss what happens when an application is started.

> We consider the case when we are in a terminal (bash) and we launch an executable file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider the case when we are in a terminal (bash) and we launch an executable file.
```

### Exec

`exec` and its variants are used to change the executable run by the process, or the **image**, as it is called in this context.
`exec` can be used toghether with fork, as done by the terminal, or without it.
One use that you may encounter in the security world is using `exec` to make a process spawn a terminal, after you have gained control of the process.

![Exec Overview](assets/exec.svg)

## Summary

- an application is the result of compiling and linking some source code
- linking can be static or dynamic
- linking (usually) involves the use of libraries
- libraries can be static or dynamic
- a process is the result of running an executable file
- the memory of a process is split into different sections
- the permissions of a memory zone can be changed using `mprotect`
- operations on files are performed using a `file descriptor`
- a new process can be created using `fork`
- the application that a process is running can be changed using `exec`

## Activities

### Tutorial: Static Linking

We want to statically link a simple application using **libc** and our own **libhello**.
Rules to compile the necessary pieces are already in the Makefile:

> - a rule tu craete the `main.o` object file - the code of our application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a rule to create the `main.o` object file - the code of our application
```

> - two rules to create the static library **libhello**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- two rules to create the static library `libhello.a`
```

## Content Sections:

### From Code to Application

Every application is written in some form of code.
That code can be compiled or interpreted, in order to what the user wants it to do.
When the code is interpreted, another application reads the contents of the source-code, and acts based on those contents.

> Interpreted code isn't the focus of the session, but can be interesting for those that want to dwelve into Web Security - the browser is an interpretor of JavaScript code.

Author: I'm simplyfing things.

> Interpreted code isn't the focus of the session, but can be interesting for those that want to dwelve into Web Security - the browser is an interpretor of JavaScript code.

Author: At a high level, the browser is the interpreter. Yes, it has components that do the effective interpretation, but you can consider that the browser, as a whole, reads the code and acts according to it

We will focus mainly on compiled code.
For compiled code to become a working application, 3 steps are needed: **compling**, **linking** and **loading**. 

[//]: # (TODO: insert big diagram)

#### Compiling

Compiling is the step in which a piece of code becomes binary data, readable by the CPU.
This step is performed by the compiler.
The best known compiler for C is **gcc**.
While tehnically it is not correct to say that we get to a binary file by compiling (assembly would like to say hello), we will leave it like this for now.
Compiling is not enough to have a working application, because we lack the libraries, which do most of the important actions of an application, like I/O, memory allocation and so on.
Those libraries can be standard libraries (libc), OS-specific libraries - the ones for system calls, or libraries written by the user.
The libraries are added to the binary file in the **linking** step.

> #### Linking

Reviewer: Say a bit about object files before linking. Otherwise, it's unclear what you are linking precisely. Use `file` to show the difference and come back to this step in the session on "Assembly Language".

This leads to big executables, that generally run faster and can run on other systems even if the libraries are not installed.
However, the staticly-linked executables aren't more portable - maybe the library uses something not present on the system.

##### Dynamic Libraries

Dynamic libraries aren't copied in the exectable, like their static counterparts.
Instead, they are loaded into memory when needed, and each executable that uses them has a way to access the symbols from those libraries.
The exact process is detailed in the first session of the binary track, TODO.
For now, the only thing you must remember is that all executables use the same dynamic library.

##### Dynamic Linking

Dynamic linking is the process during which a dynamic library is "connected" to the executable.
It is the default type of linking.
The resulting executable is smaller in size, but not as easy to port on another system.
In order for it to run on another system, the used dynamic libraries must be installed first.
It is also open to some kinds of attacks.
One of them is **Return to libc**, which is discussed at the binary track of SSS. 

> ##### PIE - Position Independent Executable

Reviewer: This is too sudden and probably unnecessary.

Reviewer 2: I agree. Drop it.

The notion of PIE is almost equivalent to the notion of PIC - position independent code - so the 2 are used interchangeably.
A PIE executable is one that can be loaded anywhere in the memory, and still work the same.
While it isn't very clear why would you want to load an execuable at any address, for now, it is very important for dynamic libraries.
Because the dynamic library doesn't know where it will be loaded when the executable is launched, it is necessary for it to be able to be loaded anywhere in the memory of the program. 

#### Loading

Loading is the process in which the program is launched.
During this process, the program code is placed in the OS memory, and is executed by the OS.
So, in a way, the program doesn't run by itself, but the OS executes the instructions of the program, similar to the interpreted languages.
A loaded executable is represented in the OS as a **process**.

### Processes

A process can be seen as an abstraction of the system's resources, built for each launched application.
It is important to know that one executable can be launched multiple times, at the same time, resulting in different processes.

> Each process has at least one execution **thread**, that runs the code of the application, one **virtual address space**, and one **file descriptor table**.

Reviewer: You've just introduced 3 large and difficult topics in the same phrase: threads, VAS and fd table. Are they really necessary? I'd skip them.

> They represent abstractions of the main resources of the system: **CPU**, **memory**, **I/O**.

Reviewer: Simply saying that the OS provides abstractions of these resources together with some high-level reasons why they are needed should suffice.

Reviewer 2: Agree.

I would say that a process has a view of the memory that we call the **process address space** and ditch the word `virtual` altogether.

#### Threads

A **thread** is an abstraction of one CPU core.
In systems that have CPUs with multiple cores - multicore systems - one process can use multiple cores at the same time.
That allows it to do multiple tasks in parralel.
One such application is called a **multithreaded aplication**.
Multithreading is a very large beast, and the security of multithreaded applications can be a course on its own, so we won't go further into details.

#### Virtual Memory

> The **virtual memory** is the abstraction of the system's memory.

Reviewer: Start with a story that there are thousands of threads (do a demo with `ps -ef` or `htop`) and then introduce the need for an abstraction over the physical memory.

Reviewer: Now that I think of it, I don't believe that **Virtual** Memory is necessary. I think just sticking to "memory" and saying "address space" is enough.

Reviewer 2: What he said. Just use "Process Address Space". Avoid `virtual`.

With this, a process is made to believe that it owns the entire memory of a system, and can use almost any portion of it.
Behind the scenes, the OS maps the virtual memory to physical memory, and ensures that two unrelated processes can't see eachother's virtual memory.
The virtual memory is split into sections, which can contain one or more pages.

> Each section can have one or more of the following permissions: **read** (R), **write** (W), **execute** (X).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each section can have one or more of the following permissions: **read (R)**, **write (W)**, **execute (X)**.
```

The main sections of a process are:

> - CODE - R-X - the code of the program

Reviewer: Say that is's compiled and, thus, in binary format, not the code written by the developer.

- STACK - RWX - the stack of the application, used for storing local variables and calling functions; more about it in the last session TODO
- HEAP - RWX - the section where dynamic memory allocations are stored - `malloc` and friends
- DATA - RW- - the global initialized variables

> - RODATA - R-- - the read-only global initialized variables

Reviewer: - Add a demo with a short C program that creates several variables and show where each of them resides
- Bold the names of the sections and their permissions.
- The heap and the stack are not rwx.

Author: they are, because by default NX is disabled

- BSS - RW- - the unitialized global variables; this section is somewhat special - it doesn't occupy space in the executable and is filled at runtime; the other sections occupy space in the executable.
- some spicy sections: GOT, PLT; you can read about them in the [Further Reading](#further-reading) section.

Now, some security stuff: all sections must follow the NX princpile - if a section is writable, it can't be executable.
Why?
You don't want your application to be able to execute code that wasn't written by you, but was injected by someone else.
Exception: notice the **stack** and **heap** sections from above.

> They are, by default, both writable and executable.

Reviewer: They're not on any more recent version of GCC. Better remove this info or you might cause confusion.

This can and is exploited, by an attack method called **shellcode**.

> Shellcodes represent a big part of the SSS Binary track.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shellcodes represent a [big part of the SSS Binary track](https://security-summer-school.github.io/binary/shellcodes/).
```
